Interactive Apps
=============================

The Interactive Apps dropdown from the toolbar will list a few standalone
programs you are able to launch directly from the browser as well as an HPC
Desktop that will allow you access all of the other software on Cheaha.

Currently, the available standalone programs are IGV, Matlab, RStudio, SAS, and
Jupyter.

All of the interactive apps have similar setup pages. For instance, if we click
HPC Desktop, the following screen will appear:

.. figure:: images/ood_interactive_hpc_vnc.png
    :align: center
    :alt: Setup for HPC Desktop session

This will allow to choose the number of hours, partition, number of cpus, and
memory per cpu needed for the job. These fields are common to all interactive
apps and are required. Not all partitions are availabe when creating an
interactive job in OOD. For instance, if you need to use the ``largemem``
partition, request those resources in a terminal session for an interactive job
or submit a batch job.

Once you've selected the compute resources you need, Launch the job. This will
bring you to the My Interactive Sessions page. This page looks like:

.. figure:: images/ood_interactive_sessions.png
    :align: center
    :alt: List of interactive sessions

There will be basic information about the number of cores and nodes as well as
the job ID in the top part of the job card. The amount of time remaining in the
job is included in the card as well as a quick link to the file browser in the
``Session ID`` field. Click ``Launch Desktop in new tab`` to open your
interactive VNC session.

.. note::

    For HPC Desktop, you do not need to request resources after you open the
    Desktop. You are already on a compute node. Any tasks you run will use the
    resources you requested when initializing the job.

.. note::

    You can request another interactive session in a terminal in HPC Desktop.
    Only the terminal you requested the other interactive session in will have
    access to the new resources. Everything else in the HPC Desktop will run
    with the resources you requested when creating the initial job.

These interactive jobs can be stopped early by clicking ``Delete`` on the right
side of the job card. 


Standalone Programs
--------------------------------

As shown earlier, some software can be run outside of the VNC session. Setup for
most of these follow the same rules as creation of an HPC Desktop job in terms
of requesting resources. You will also need to select the version of software to
use for the job. 

.. note::

    Versions in OOD and versions seen when loading modules in a terminal may not
    match. If you need a specific version available in OOD, submit a support
    ticket at support@listserv.uab.edu


Jupyter
--------------------------------

Jupyter notebooks are available for use in OOD, but some extra setup is
required. The extra fields you need to fill out are seen below:

.. figure:: images/ood_jupyter.png
    :align: center
    :alt: Environment setup for Jupyter notebooks

At the bottom of the ``Environment Setup`` field, you will need to place a
``module load`` command to load the version of Anaconda your Jupyter job will be
running. View the list of Anaconda modules installed on Cheaha in a terminal
session using ``module spider Anaconda``. 

In addition, if you are using the CUDA cores for GPU-enabled machine learning,
you will need to load the corresponding CUDA module here. Use ``module spider
cuda`` to view the list of CUDA modules.

In the ``Extra Jupyter Arguments`` field, you will need to add a path to the
directory with your jupyter notebooks. For instance, if your notebooks are
stored in your user directory, put ``--notebook-dir=$USER_DATA`` in this field.
You will be able to navigate to the notebook if it is in a subdirectory of
``notebook-dir``.

Submitting the job will bring you to the ``My Interactive Jobs`` window while
the Jupyter job is initialized. Click ``Connect to Jupyter`` to open the Jupyter
Home Page.

.. note::

    If you get a Failed to Connect message when opening the job, close the tab
    and wait a couple of minutes. Jupyter is still initializing and takes some
    time after the job first begins running.

The Jupyter Home Page will look like:

.. figure:: images/ood_jupyter_home.png
    :align: center
    :alt: Home page for jupyter notebooks

From here, you can navigate to and select an existing notebook, or you can
create a new one using one of your existing virtual environments or the base environment.


Python Libraries and Virtual Environments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To run Jupyter with specific libraries and packages outside of the base install,
you will need to create a virtual environment first. You can do this either in
an HPC Desktop job or in the ``Conda`` tab of the Jupyter homepage.

The ``Conda`` has the following layout:

.. figure:: images/ood_jupyter_create_conda_env.png
    :align: center
    :alt: Creating and managing environments in Jupyter


1. Current environments (red): a listing of the current existing environments in
your ``$USER_HOME/.conda/envs`` folder. 
2. Available packages (green): a list of all packages available to install from conda sources.
3. Installed packages (blue): a list of the packages installed in the currently
selected environment.

To create a new environment, click the ``+`` button at the top of the ``Current
environments`` pane and enter the name of the environment. After it has been
created, you can select packages to install by searching for the package name at
the top right of the ``Available packages`` pane. After selecting the package,
click the ``->`` button, and the package and all its dependencies will be
installed.

.. note::

    If a package is not available using the ``conda`` command directly, it will
    not be listed as an available package. Use a terminal window to install the
    package as necessary.


.. note::

    In order to use an environment with Jupyter, the ``ipykernel`` library is
    necessary. Creating an environment in the Conda tab will autoinstall this
    library. If using the terminal, use ``conda install ipykernel`` to install
    it.

After successfully creating your environment, navigate to the Files tab. You can
create a new notebook using the ``New`` dropdown menu in the top right. Select
your virtual environment of choice, and a notebook will be created and opened.